We Begin the day as diplomats dare to
talk seriously about a serious ceasefire
Israel and Hamas have been at War
practically non-stop seven months now
the only pause was about a week last
November tonight something more
substantial appears to be in the works
Israel is reportedly offering a limited
ceasefire in exchange for the release of
33 Israeli hostages Hamas reportedly is
demanding the release of hundreds of
Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli
prisons
now will Hamas and Israel will they find
Common Ground will a no be a green light
for Israeli troops to launch their
ground defensive against Rafa this is
what Israel's closest allies said on
Monday Arab and Western foreign
ministers are meeting in Saudi Arabia
with the war in Gaza on their minds this
is the US Secretary of State's seventh
visit to the Middle East since the
October 7th attacks and he's urging
Hamas to accept this deal proposal a
40-day ceasefire and the release of
Palestinians imprisoned by Israel in
exchange for more than 30 Israeli
hostages held by Hamas Hamas has before
it a proposal that is
extraordinarily extraordinarily generous
uh on the part of Israel and In This
Moment the only thing standing between
the people of Gaza and a ceasefire is
Hamas they have to decide and they have
to decide quickly
conditions in Gaza have worsened
overnight three separate Israeli attacks
killed 22 people in Rafa hitting three
houses including that of the Abu Taha
family their small child died in the
attack we were sitting in our homes and
then the house was bombed and we didn't
know anything everyone was sleeping in
their bed the displaced those who were
not displaced most of these Martyrs were
displaced in addition to the the family
living here 10 members of the family and
the displaced were killed they have
nothing to do with anything all of them
are girls and women this is the target
they're looking
for Israel still plans to invade Rafa to
root out what officials say are Hamas
militants hiding in the city the new
ceasefire on the table is only an
extended
pause Israel has said once it's over it
will resume its assault on Gaza
potentially worsening the scale of a
humanitarian crisis nearing its seventh
month all right I want to pull in now
Hans yakob Schindler he's an
international diplomacy analyst and the
senior director at the counter extremism
project he joins us tonight from New
York Mr Schindler it's good to see you
so diplomats they have been open
especially in the last 24 hours about
their optimism about this possible
ceasefire deal um what does this tell
you well I mean we are close undoubtedly
but I'd like to add a word of portion we
been closed before um it has frequently
really uh been a problem that the
leadership in Gaza of Hamas was not
willing the willing to accept the
conditions of a deal that the Hamas
leadership outside Gaza for example in
Qatar was willing to accept so while
there is pressure not just from
secretary blinken but also 13 Nations
collectively called on Hamas to take the
deal and to release the hostages it's
only over when it's over and that is the
inter ational Community pressuring Hamas
which what you just mentioned what about
the the pressure on Israel to make this
ceasefire deal a
reality well the Israeli government to
be Frank has been open to make a
ceasefire deal um for a while now there
has been a subtle shift from only
wanting to accept shortterm uh
ceasefires and a limited number of of
people uh also only uh uh to be released
only Palestinians with minor crimes now
that has shifted to a longer willingness
to have a longer ceasefire but also to
release Palestinians that have more
serious crimes against them and what
would the Israelis like to have from
Hamas look I mean it's very clear that
the general aim of uh Israel's
operations in Gaza I.E the destruction
of Hamas as an ongoing terrorist concern
is still and remain still the main one
of the main targets the other ones of
course being the host and this is where
the problem exists the hostages are at
the same time for Hamas their life
insurance so I doubt that Hamas is
willing to uh release all of the
hostages equally I doubt that even if
this deal is made that Israel is going
to commit to an unending ceasefire there
is still Rafa there's still four
battalions of Hamas in Rafa as well as
the key leaders leaders save Dave and
Sina in Rafa they cannnot leave live
leave Raa alone otherwise Hamas will
reconstitute very fast after they leave
and and so how do you see this if Hamas
does not take this deal will that be a
green light then for an Israeli ground
operation into
Rafa let me formulate like this if the
Israeli government can't get the
hostages back with this deal very
shortly they've been preparing for the
Rafa offensive planning talking to the
American uh government about their plans
how to protect civilians in Gaza doing
their offense
if they can't get the hostages back the
Israeli government has no choice they
will have to do this offensive and try
to free the hostages by force rather
than through negotiations all right
another topic that's on the radar
particularly in in Israel Israeli media
are reporting that the international
criminal court might soon issue arrest
warrants for senior Israeli government
and military officials I mean do you see
this timing as a coincidence or or is
there something more
here well I mean first of all the plan
is uh potentially to issue arrest ons
not only for Israeli senior military
officials but also for Hamas officials
so if it happens it hopefully will be a
bi biased approach looking at what
happen an arrest war is not necessarily
yet a conviction of guilt mind you so I
don't see a particular connection
between what the IC ICT does and what um
the negotiations do in in Cairo and in
Doha okay H Shindler as always Mr
Shindler we appreciate your time and
your analysis thank you all right we're
want to go now to Cairo and I'm joined
by journalist kareim elari Kareem it's
good to see you you know all eyes are
about to be on where you are right now
Egypt are you seeing any movement
towards a possible deal a possible
agreement well we have basically four
positive signs the first sign is that
even before this meeting in Cairo took
place um a high ranking Hamas official
said that there are no major issues any
longer in the way and they will look
positively to the new Israeli proposals
um the second sign is there was a
delegation of the Egyptian Security in
Israel last Friday they came back and we
have heard from sources of the Egyptian
side that there are concessions on the
Israeli side the third thing is what you
already mentioned that is what uh us
what the US foreign minister blinkin
said about a general proposal of course
that's a way to also put pressure on
Hamas but something is moving and there
seems to be there's also a force point
there is a straighter line of
communication it seems to be that the
leadership of Hamas in Gaza is now able
to do the decisions on their own uh
before this was always through the
political leadership in in in in in
Qatar had to go back through the
Egyptians to Gaza then it took days
because the leadership of in Gaza is
undercover until the answer came back so
a much straighter line of communication
which is of course important and Kim do
we know what is being asked of the Hamas
delegation in
Egypt well I think nothing new it's uh
to release the hostages and to keep a
ceasefire one once it's agreed upon um
all the other questions are questions or
issues of the postwar order and there
seems to be until now no coherent plan
from neither side about this time can we
say then that there have been any
concessions made by Israel um in
this agreement this offer
yeah there uh is some movement there's
some movement on one of the key demands
uh of Hamas they talking about the fac
release of hostages in stages in
exchange with Palestinian prisoners and
at least Le in the second phase there
should be an agreement for permanent
ceasefire so that's a key demand the
permanent ceasefire of Hamas um now we
hear through Us Media through us us
Network actually saying that in the new
Israeli proposal there is the term of
restoration of sustainable calm which is
not a permanent ceasefire but moving
into this direction there's also talk
about displayed Palestinians being able
to go back to the houses in the North in
Gaza that is also of course related to
the prolonged presence of the Israeli
Army in the Gaza and you know something
we're seeing that we we have not seen is
diplomats are now rather open with their
optimism about what's about to happen
what do you think is behind this
momentum for a deal at this
point well I think one word pressure
pressure on all sides I mean Hamas is
under pressure to uh avoid any kind of
military offensive in Rafa the Israeli
government is under International under
International pressure not at least by
their most important Ally uh the US to
agree to a ceasefire and to put the Rafa
offensive at least onto the back burner
I think also we have a case where the US
President Joe Biden himself is under
pressure through the protests in the US
universities and is handing down the
pressure now uh onto Netanyahu in
addition to that Netanyahu is under
pressure at home because people see that
there's a failure that he didn't bring
back the hostages in the last six months
all that created a a movement in this
negotiations we will see if it will lead
to to the conclusion of the talk talk
especially before the Rafa offensive
because if this offensive happens of
course all the deck of card will be
reshuffled again journalist kareim
alahari with the latest from Cairo
tonight Kareem as always thank you